[`core` ] Integrate Flash attention 2 in most used models (#25598)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/perf_infer_gpu_one.md

However, note that due to the fact that Flash Attention does not support computing attention scores with padd tokens under the hood, we need to manually pad / unpad the attention scores for batched inference when the sequence contains padd tokens. This leads to an important slowdown for batched `generate` with padd tokens. To overcome this, one should use Flash Attention without padd tokens in the sequence for training (e.g. by packing a dataset, i.e. concatenating sequences until reaching the maximum sequence length)

Below is the expected speedup you can get for a simple forward pass on `tiiuae/falcon-7b` with a sequence length of 4096 and various batch sizes, without padd tokens:

<div style="text-align: center">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/ybelkada/documentation-images/resolve/main/falcon-7b-inference-large-seqlen.png">
</div>

Below is the expected speedup you can get for a simple forward pass on `meta-llama/Llama-7b-hf` with a sequence length of 4096 and various batch sizes, without padd tokens:

<div style="text-align: center">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/ybelkada/documentation-images/resolve/main/llama-7b-inference-large-seqlen.png">
</div>

> TODO: @younesbelkada add more figures and cases where FA fails.

Author: I'll address that a bit later, I need to check first if we can merge https://github.com/younesbelkada/transformers/pull/5

</Tip>

Flash Attention 2 can considerably speedup the training and inference speed of transformer based models. Flash Attention 2 has been introduced in the [official Flash Attention repository](https://github.com/Dao-AILab/flash-attention) from Tri Dao et al. The scientific paper of Flash attention can be found [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14135).

Make sure to follow the installation guide on the repository mentioned above to properly install Flash Attention 2. Once that package is installed, you can benefit from this feature.

We natively support Flash Attention 2 for some models, currently supported architectures are:

- Llama
- Falcon

You can request to add Flash Attention 2 support for more models by opening an issue on GitHub!

And they can be used for inference and training, including training with padding tokens - which is currently not supported for `BetterTransformer` API below.

<Tip>

Flash Attention 2 can only be used for models using fp16 or bf16 dtype, and can be run only on NVIDIA-GPU devices. Make sure to cast your model to the appropriate dtype and load them on a supported device before using that feature.
  
</Tip>

### Quick usage

> To enable Flash Attention 2 in your model, simply add `use_flash_attn_2` in `from_pretrained` arguments

Author: Good point ! should be modified now

```python
import torch
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer, LlamaForCausalLM

model_id = "tiiuae/falcon-7b"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_id, 
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16, 
    use_flash_attn_2=True,
)
```

And use it for generation or fine-tuning.

### Expected speedups

You can benefit from considerable speedup for fine-tuning and inference, especially for long sequence length. 

> However, note that due to the fact that Flash Attention does not support computing attention scores with padd tokens under the hood, we need to manually pad / unpad the attention scores for batched inference when the sequence contains padd tokens. This leads to an important slowdown for batched `generate` with padd tokens. To overcome this, one should use Flash Attention without padd tokens in the sequence for training (e.g. by packing a dataset, i.e. concatenating sequences until reaching the maximum sequence length)

Author: Yep added few lines in that direction, let me know how does that sounds to you

In addition to this guide, relevant information can be found as well in [the guide for training on a single GPU](perf_train_gpu_one) and [the guide for inference on CPUs](perf_infer_cpu).

## Flash Attention 2

<Tip>

Note that this feature is experimental and might considerably change in future versions. For instance, the Flash Attention 2 API might migrate to `BetterTransformer` API in the near future.

> 

Reviewer: > the Flash Attention 2 API might migrate to `BetterTransformer` API in the near future. 

did not know this was planned 😄 If not let's just not say anything

Reviewer 2: Well it is all about providing a single meaningful API to users and avoid confusing them. In PyTorch 2.2 (hopefully not too late!), we'll be in a state where FA2 will be supported by SDPA so basically a duplicate of this.

Author: this has been discussed internally and it was the consensus we have all found together

</Tip>

Flash Attention 2 can considerably speed up transformer-based models' training and inference speed. Flash Attention 2 has been introduced in the [official Flash Attention repository](https://github.com/Dao-AILab/flash-attention) by Tri Dao et al. The scientific paper on Flash Attention can be found [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14135).

Make sure to follow the installation guide on the repository mentioned above to properly install Flash Attention 2. Once that package is installed, you can benefit from this feature.

> We natively support Flash Attention 2 for some models. The currently supported architectures are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We natively support Flash Attention 2 for the following models:
```

- Llama
- Falcon

> You can request to add Flash Attention 2 support for more models by opening an issue on GitHub! The supported models can be used for inference and training, including training with padding tokens - *which is currently not supported for `BetterTransformer` API below.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can request to add Flash Attention 2 support for more models by opening an issue on GitHub, and even open a Pull Request to integrate the changes. The supported models can be used for inference and training, including training with padding tokens - *which is currently not supported for `BetterTransformer` API below.*
```
Would be cool to have maybe an issue that tracks models that support flash attention, and tag it as good second issue WDYT?

<Tip>

> Flash Attention 2 can only be used for models in the fp16 or bf16 dtypes and run only on NVIDIA-GPU devices. Make sure to cast your model to the appropriate dtype and load them on a supported device before using that feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flash Attention 2 can only be used when the models' dtype is  `fp16` or `bf16` and runs only on NVIDIA-GPU devices. Make sure to cast your model to the appropriate dtype and load them on a supported device before using that feature.
```

  
</Tip>

### Quick usage

To enable Flash Attention 2 in your model, add `use_flash_attention_2` in the `from_pretrained` arguments:

```python
import torch
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer, LlamaForCausalLM

model_id = "tiiuae/falcon-7b"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_id, 
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16, 
    use_flash_attention_2=True,
)
```

And use it for generation or fine-tuning.

### Expected speedups

You can benefit from considerable speedups for fine-tuning and inference, especially for long sequences. However, since Flash Attention does not support computing attention scores with padding tokens under the hood, we must manually pad / unpad the attention scores for batched inference when the sequence contains padding tokens. This leads to a significant slowdown for batched generations with padding tokens. 

> To overcome this, one should use Flash Attention without padding tokens in the sequence for training (e.g., by packing a dataset, i.e., concatenating sequences until reaching the maximum sequence length, for example, we perform something in the following lines specifically [here](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/examples/pytorch/language-modeling/run_clm.py#L516).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To overcome this, one should use Flash Attention without padding tokens in the sequence for training (e.g., by packing a dataset, i.e., concatenating sequences until reaching the maximum sequence length. An example is provided [here](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/examples/pytorch/language-modeling/run_clm.py#L516).
```

> Below is the expected speedup you can get for a simple forward pass on tiiuae/falcon-7b with a sequence length of 4096 and various batch sizes without padding tokens:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the expected speedup you can get for a simple forward pass on [tiiuae/falcon-7b](https://hf.co/tiiuae/falcon-7b) with a sequence length of 4096 and various batch sizes without padding tokens:
```

> Below is the expected speedup you can get for a simple forward pass on `tiiuae/falcon-7b` with a sequence length of 4096 and various batch sizes, without padding tokens:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the expected speedup you can get for a simple forward pass on [tiiuae/falcon-7b](https://hf.co/tiiuae/falcon-7b) with a sequence length of 4096 and various batch sizes, without padding tokens:
```

<div style="text-align: center">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/ybelkada/documentation-images/resolve/main/falcon-7b-inference-large-seqlen.png">
</div>

> Below is the expected speedup you can get for a simple forward pass on `meta-llama/Llama-7b-hf` with a sequence length of 4096 and various batch sizes, without padding tokens:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the expected speedup you can get for a simple forward pass on [`meta-llama/Llama-7b-hf`](https://hf.co/meta-llama/Llama-7b-hf) with a sequence length of 4096 and various batch sizes, without padding tokens:
```

<div style="text-align: center">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/ybelkada/documentation-images/resolve/main/llama-7b-inference-large-seqlen.png">
</div>

> For sequences with padding tokens (training with padding tokens or generating with padding tokens), we need to unpad / pad the input sequences to compute correctly the attention scores. For relatively small sequence length, on pure forward pass, this creates an overhead leading to a small speedup (below we used a padding rate of 0.3). 

Reviewer: What's a padding rate of 0.3?

<div style="text-align: center">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/ybelkada/documentation-images/resolve/main/llama-2-small-seqlen-padding.png">
</div>

But for large sequence length you can benefit from interesting speedup for pure inference (also training)

> Note that Flash Attention makes the attention computation more memory efficient, meaning you can train with much larger sequence lengths without facing CUDA OOM issues. 

Reviewer: This is super vague, let's try to give number / approximate

<div style="text-align: center">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/ybelkada/documentation-images/resolve/main/llama-2-large-seqlen-padding.png">
</div>

> ### Advanced usage

Reviewer: very nice examples!
